‘Sir Kenrick would be a splendid match for her’, said the Vicar’s wife.

‘As poor as Job, and as proud as Lucifer,’ retorted the Vicar, without lifting his eyes from a volume of his favourite Bishop Berkeley.

It was the Vicar’s way in these tête-à-tête conversations by the domestic hearth. He read, and his wife talked to him. He could keep his attention on the most intricate chain of argument, and yet never answer Mrs. Dulcimer’s speculative assertions or vague questionings away from the purpose.[2] This was the happy result of long habit. The Vicar loved his books, and his wife loved the exercise of her tongue. His morning hours were sacred. He studied or read as he pleased till dinner-time, secure from feminine interruption. But the evening was a privileged time for Mrs. Dulcimer. She brought a big workbasket, like an inverted beehive, into the library directly after dinner, and established herself in the arm-chair opposite the Vicar’s, ready for a comfortable chat. A comfortable chat meant a vivacious monologue, with an occasional remark from Mr. Dulcimer, who came in now and then like a chorus. He had his open book on the reading easel attached to his chair, and turned the leaves with a languid air, sometimes as if out of mere absence of mind; but he was deep in philosophy, or metaphysics, or theology, or antiquarianism, for the greater part of his time; and his inward ear was listening to the mystic voices of the dead, while his outward ear gave respectful attention to Mrs. Dulcimer’s critical observations upon the living.

‘As poor as Job, and as proud as Lucifer,’[3] repeated the Vicar, with his eye upon a stiffish passage in Berkeley.

‘I call it a proper pride,’ said Mrs. Dulcimer. ‘And as for poverty, she would have money enough for both. And then he has the estate.’

‘Mortgaged up to the hilt.’

‘And the title.’

‘Now do you really believe, Selina, that those three letters of the alphabet, S I R, prefixed to a man’s name, can give him the smallest possible distinction in the estimate of any of his fellow-creatures not lunatic?’

‘What is the use of talking in that high and mighty way, Clement? I know that Mary Turner, an insignificant little thing with red hair and a speckly skin, who was at school with me at the Misses Turk’s, at Great Yafford, was very much looked up to by all the girls because her uncle was a baronet. He lived a long way off, and he never took any notice of her, that we could find out; but he was a baronet, and we all felt as if there was a difference in her on that account. I don’t pretend to say that we were not very ridiculous for thinking [4]so, but still you know a school is only the world in little—and the world sets a high value on titles. I should like to see Beatrix mistress of Culverhouse Castle.’

‘Her father’s money would be convenient for paying off the mortgages, no doubt, provided Mr. Harefield approved of the marriage. Rather a difficult old gentleman, I fancy.’

‘Difficult!’ cried Mrs. Dulcimer; ‘he’s detestable! a wicked old tyrant. If it were not for our friendship Beatrix’s life would be unendurable.’

‘Do you really think we are any good to her?’ inquired the Vicar, in his dreamily uncertain way, as of a man who was too doubtful about the groundwork of existence to feel any certainty about its minor details.

This was his Bishop Berkeley mood, his mind varying in hue and tone according to the book he was reading. Just now he felt that mind was paramount over matter, and was hardly disposed to interest himself warmly in a young woman who might have no existence except in his own idea of her.

[5]

‘My dear, our house is the only notion of home the poor child has,—the only place where she meets pleasant people, or hears and sees pleasant things. How can we fail to improve and develop her? I am sure, without egotism, I may say that I have been a God-send to that motherless girl. Think how farouche she was when she first came to us.’

‘Yes, she was a wild, untamed kind of creature,’ assented the Vicar. ‘Beautiful as a portrait by Rembrandt though, with that tawny skin of hers. I call her la belle sauvage. She always reminds me of Pocahontas.’

‘Now wouldn’t it be a blessing, Clement, if we could see her well married—married to a man of position, you know—and an honourable-minded man, like Kenrick? You know you always said he was honourable. You could always believe him.’

‘True, my love. Kenrick had his good qualities. He was not a lad that my heart ever warmed to, but I believe he did his work honestly, and he never told me a lie.’

‘Then don’t you think,’ urged the enthusiastic[6] Selina, ‘that he would make Beatrix Harefield an excellent husband?’

‘My dear,’ said the Vicar, gravely, ‘you are the best natured of women; but I am afraid you do a great deal of harm.’

‘Clement!’

‘Yes, my love. Good-nature in the abstract is undoubtedly beautiful; but an active good-nature, always on the alert to do some service to its fellow-creatures, is of all attributes the most dangerous. Even the attempt of this good man, Bishop Berkeley, to found a college in the Bermudas resulted in waste of time and money. He would have done better had he stayed at his Irish Deanery. The man who does least harm in the world is your calmly selfish person who goes through life by the narrow path of a rational self-indulgence, and never turns aside to benefit or interfere with the rest of the human race.’

‘One of your dreadful paradoxes, Clement. How does that agree with St. Paul’s definition of charity?’

‘My love, St. Paul’s charity is a supremely passive virtue. It suffereth long, is not easily provoked,[7] is not puffed up, thinketh no evil—all which qualities are compatible with strict neutrality as to one’s fellow-creatures’ affairs.’

‘Suffereth long—and is kind, you left that out, Clement.’

‘Kindness there I take to imply a mental state, and not a pushing, exacting benevolence,’ replied the Vicar. ‘Charity poketh not its nose into its neighbour’s business—maketh not matches—busieth not itself with the conduct of other people’s lives—and never doeth any harm. Good-nature does no end of mischief—in a perfectly well-meaning way.’

The Vicar spoke with some soreness. Poor Mrs. Dulcimer’s good-nature, and sometimes misdirected energy, had been getting her into trouble for the last twenty years. Everybody liked her; everybody dreaded and abhorred her good-nature. She had no children of her own, and was always full of good advice for the mothers of her acquaintance. She knew when babies ought to be weaned, and when they were sickening for the measles. She tried to heal family quarrels, and invariably made the breach wider. She loved match-making, but[8] her matches, when brought to the triumphant conclusion of licence or wedding cake, seldom stood the test of a few years’ matrimony. She was so eager to do the best for the young men and women of her acquaintance, that she generally brought ill-assorted people together, taking too broad a view of the fitness of things, on the ground of income, family, age, and such vulgar qualifications, and ignoring those subtle differences which set an eternal mark of separation upon certain members of the human family.

‘I think, Selina, if I were you, I would leave Beatrix to find a husband for herself,’ said the Vicar, stretching out his legs comfortably before the wide hearth. ‘She is young—there is plenty of time. Let her come here as often as she pleases. I like to see that Rembrandt face of hers. But let things take their own course.

“There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough hew them as we will.”
Don’t you think it is almost an impertinence towards that ever active Providence for us poor worms to be always taking one another’s lives[9] under our petty protection, and trying to shape them our way?’

‘Clement!’ exclaimed Mrs. Dulcimer, ruffling her plumes a little. She wore a good deal of lace frilling and muslin puffing about her neck and breast, and these adornments were subject to an occasional agitation, like the feathers of an excited Dorking, or one of the Vicar’s golden-pencilled Hamburgs. ‘Clement,’ cried Mrs. Dulcimer, ‘you have a beautiful temper, but I’m afraid you are selfish.’

The Vicar laid down his book with a smile of satisfaction. He saw the opportunity for a paradox.

‘My love, did you ever know a good-tempered man who wasn’t selfish? or rather, did you ever know a thoroughly selfish person who wasn’t good-tempered? Your wisely selfish man knows his own interest too well to fret and fume about trifles. He knows that, after five-and-twenty years of age, the supreme good in this life is repose, and that he can never enjoy it unless he cultivates an easy temper.’

[10]

‘Selfishness is a vice, Clement.’

‘That depends upon what we call selfishness. If a strict neutrality as to my neighbour’s business means selfishness, assuredly I am the most selfish of men.’

‘The Gospel tells us we are to love our neighbour as ourselves, Clement.’

‘I obey that divine precept implicitly. I never worry myself. I never worry my neighbour.’

The Vicar might have gone a step further, and said that he liked to feed his neighbour as well as he liked to feed himself—for, in that one quality of caring for the body as well as for the souls of other people, Clement Dulcimer was a faithful follower of his Divine Master.

‘And I’m afraid you allow things in your parish that oughtn’t to be, Clement, sometimes,’ ventured Mrs. Dulcimer.

‘My dear, God allows them. They are done under the All-seeing Eye. If He cannot make men better, do you suppose I can?’

‘You might lead them to Him, dear.’

‘I try my best to do that, Selina; but I don’t[11] drive them. That’s where I fall short, I admit. Cyril is trying his hand at the driving process. He’s young and energetic. We shall see how it answers, and how long he sticks at it.’

‘Cyril is the most earnest young man you’ve ever had as a curate.’

‘I taught him myself, and I know what he’s made of,’ murmured the Vicar.

‘And there’s no denying that he has done good already, Clement. The schools are better attended, and there are more poor people at church on a Sunday evening.’

‘Since you have such a high opinion of Cyril, how is it that you have never thought of him as a husband for Beatrix? A clergyman ought to marry a fortune if he marries at all. He can put the money out to higher interest than any one else. He keeps a deposit account in heaven.’

‘But, Clement, the title!’ exclaimed Mrs. Dulcimer, ‘and Culverhouse Castle. Such a position for dear Beatrix.’

‘Ah, to be sure, the position! I suppose a girl thinks more about that now-a-days than of her[12] lover’s mind or person. But certainly Cyril is both handsomer and cleverer than his cousin Kenrick. I should like a curate with a large income, it would be so good for the parish. And then we might rub on without the weekly offertory Cyril is always plaguing me to institute, and which I am convinced will set my congregation against me. Fancy me going up to my pulpit as a beggar every Sunday, and my people expecting value for their money out of my sermon. Imagine their remarks at the church door: “Not much there for sixpence,” “A very poor shilling’s worth,” and so forth.’

‘Clement,’ cried Mrs. Dulcimer, thoroughly scandalized this time, and with all her frills in motion, ‘you ought never to have been a clergyman.’

‘My love, I freely admit that some easier walk in life might have suited me better. A sub-librarian’s place, now, in some antique library, like the Cheetham Institution at Manchester. I should have had my books round me, and my superior to tell me what to do. No responsibilities, and leisure for self-culture. But if I am a poor creature as a parson, you supplement me so well, Selina, that,[13] between us, I think we do our duty to the parish. That last batch of soup was excellent. I tasted it yesterday at old dame Hardy’s. The clear soup we get at Lord Highflyer’s state dinners is mere pot-liquor compared with it. Indeed, I think,’ pursued the Vicar, dreamily, as if he were meditating a proposition of Berkeley’s, ‘that all clear soups are more or less a mistake—tasting only of sherry and burnt sugar.’

‘Always thinking of temporal blessings, Clement.’

‘They are the only blessings we can fully realize while on this side of eternity, my dear. We may be excused if we sometimes set an undue value on them.’

Mrs. Dulcimer sighed, and opened her workbasket. There were little shirts and flannel swathings to be made for new-comers into this world of troubles—heirs apparent to a life of labour, with a reversionary interest in the workhouse. The Vicar’s wife spread her piece of linen on the table, and began a series of problems with a parallelogram in stiff brown paper, in order to find out how she[14] might get the maximum of baby-shirts out of the minimum of linen. It vexed her that her husband should take life so lightly, and be troubled about a few things, when she was troubled about so many. She had no doubt that he was in the wrong, and that she and Cyril Culverhouse understood the real meaning of their duties a great deal better than the Vicar.

Clement Dulcimer was the living embodiment of an idea which at this time had not yet been put before the world by Mr. Matthew Arnold. He was all sweetness and light. He believed in culture as the highest good. He lived among his books, and upon his books; and those books were of the best that the elect of this world have written. He sought no happiness beyond his library, save in his garden and poultry yard, which afforded his senses the gratification of colour and sweet scents, sunshine and balmy air. He had travelled little, and sighed but faintly for a pleasure which he found impossible. His books and his poor absorbed all his spare cash. There was none left for foreign travel—so Mr. Dulcimer was content to enjoy Greece in the pages of Thucydides,[15] or Childe Harold—to stand on the threshold of the sacred grove with Antigone—to know Cithæron only on the lips of Œdipus—to see the sandy plain of Marathon, or the walls of Thebes, with his mind’s eye alone.

‘I dare say I should be disappointed if I saw the reality,’ he murmured placidly. ‘Realities are so disenchanting. Or I might be taken by brigands, and poor Selina would have to sell her great-grand-father’s silver tea-kettle to ransom me.’

The living at Little Yafford was a good one, and the parish was small. It was altogether one of those exceptional cures which are reserved for the more fortunate sons of the Church. Mr. Dulcimer had obtained it while he was still a young man, the living being in the gift of his uncle, Sir Philip Dulcimer, of Hawtree Hall and Yafford Park. Yafford Park was rather a dreary place, with an unwieldly barrack of the Georgian era in the middle of it, and Sir Philip had been very glad to grant a large lease of park and mansion to Mr. Piper, the Great Yafford cotton-spinner, who spent a great deal more money in little Yafford than Sir Philip would [16]have done, but who was looked down upon by his neighbours on principle. Great Yafford, the manufacturing town five miles off, was as Radical a place as you would care to find, but Little Yafford was essentially aristocratic, ignored the commercial element altogether, and thought it an affliction to be so near the tall chimney shafts of the busy town.

Little Yafford had perhaps some right to give itself airs, on the strength of being one of the prettiest villages in Yorkshire. It was like a spoiled beauty, and felt that nothing could be too good for it. Great bleak hills rose up between it and the bitter east winds, a river wound in and out of the village like a shining serpent, and licked its green meadows and garden boundaries. The long low stone bridge was as old as the Romans. There was not an ugly house in the place—except that big barrack of Sir Philip’s, and that was hidden behind the fine old elms and oaks of the park. There was not a neglected garden, or an objectionable pigsty. The gentry were all well-to-do people, who bestowed money and care upon the beautification of their homes; while the poorer parishioners were under the [17]influence of Mr. Dulcimer’s sweetness and light, and Mrs. Dulcimer’s active good-nature, and laboured industriously to make their cottages lovely.

To come from stony, noisy, smoky, crowded Great Yafford to pastoral Little Yafford, was like coming from purgatory to paradise—an earthly paradise of rustic beauty and placid repose, content, and harmony. Yet Mr. Dulcimer’s last new curate, Cyril Culverhouse, breathed many a thoughtful sigh over the ignorances and even vice which he discovered in this smiling village. Coming out of some cottage door, over which the roses and honeysuckle hung in unpruned luxuriance, his lips would often involuntarily ejaculate the familiar words of the evening collect—‘Lighten our darkness, we beseech Thee, O Lord.’

CHAPTER II.
sword and gown.

At various periods of his tranquil career the Rev. Clement Dulcimer had found it convenient to add to his income by taking a private pupil or two. He could not have endured what he called a herd of young men, meaning half a dozen, but he rather liked to have a couple of intelligent young fellows following him about through the dawdling progress of his out-of-door life, or hanging upon his words in the comfortable quietude of his study. He was an excellent master for classics and theology—mathematics he frankly abhorred—and he taught conscientiously in his own unconventional way. The men he coached generally came out well; but in after life there was a tinge of eccentricity in them—a strain imparted by Clement Dulcimer unawares—and which in one or two cases took the unhappy form[19] of latitudinarianism. Spinoza on the brain, some people called it.

The two pupils who had stayed longest at the Vicarage, and occupied the most important position in the minds of the Vicar and his wife, were Kenrick Culverhouse and his first cousin Cyril. Old Sir Kenrick and the Vicar had been at Oxford together, and it seemed the most natural thing that the baronet should send his only son and his orphan nephew to his old chum, more especially as he could nowhere else educate them so well or so cheaply. Culverhouse Castle was a fine historical place in Hampshire, which tourists went out of their way to see, but which the late Sir Kenrick did not regard with any enthusiasm. He had been more or less under a cloud of money difficulties ever since he could remember, and preferred lodgings in St. James’s to his feudal birthplace. The moat was all very well, and so was the massive old keep, on the top of which the gardener had made a kitchen-garden for gooseberries and strawberry beds; but Sir Kenrick liked Jermyn Street and the clubs a great deal better; and, if a man must have a castle,[20] the King’s Bench, in which he had spent some of the liveliest days of his youth, was much pleasanter to his mind than Culverhouse. Lady Culverhouse was fond of the castle, no doubt—or at any rate she stayed there, and it was a tradition in the family that no other air suited her, and that she was quite rooted to the spot; a tradition which was all the more firmly established because nobody had ever proposed taking her anywhere else. Old Sir Kenrick and his wife had gone to join the family ashes in the vault under Culverhouse Church, and young Sir Kenrick reigned in his father’s stead. All the quicksilver in the Culverhouse veins seemed to have run out with the last baronet. Young Kenrick was steady and thoughtful, and the mortgages weighed upon his spirits like a nightmare. He was always thinking what the estate would be if those mortgages could but be paid off.

It seemed to him an Eldorado. But there were only he and his cousin and heir presumptive to accomplish this great work. And how were two young men, moderately gifted, to earn fifty thousand pounds between them?

[21]

‘Unless one of us were to break out into a Walter Scott, or discover a new motive power to supersede steam, I don’t see how it’s to be done,’ Kenrick said to Mrs. Dulcimer, in one of his confidential talks with that good-natured lady, who knew all that he could tell her about the mortgages and the property. ‘The army won’t do it—and the church won’t do it—and the law wouldn’t do it under thirty years’ work. Engineering might do it, perhaps, if we could blossom into Brunels, and get contracts for railways and things; but, you see, neither of us has a turn for engineering.’

‘You ought both to marry heiresses,’ suggested Mrs. Dulcimer.

‘Oh no, that’s horrid. We couldn’t do that,’ cried Kenrick. ‘That’s too contemptible.’

This was how Kenrick had talked at seventeen, when he was in his state of tutelage. He was more reticent about himself and his prospects now, at nine-and-twenty, but Mrs. Dulcimer had forgotten nothing, and when Kenrick looked grave, she always thought he was brooding upon the mortgages.

‘I know that the dearest wish of his heart is to redeem[22] the family position,’ she said, and this was what set her thinking about a marriage between Sir Kenrick and old Mr. Harefield’s only daughter and heiress.

Cyril had gone into the church. He loved his profession for its own sake, and thought very little of the loaves and fishes. He would like to be a bishop, no doubt, when his time came; but it was for the sake of having a great influence and doing things in his own way, not for social status or income, that he would have desired a mitre. Doing things in his own way—that was Cyril’s idea of a perfect life. To make his church beautiful, according to his idea of beauty, to have good music, and a strict adherence to the rubrics in Edward the Sixth’s Prayer-book, to infuse something of the poetry of old traditions into the prosaic expression of a reformed faith—to train his flock in his own way of thinking—to create for himself an enthusiastic and fervent congregation. These were the things which Cyril Culverhouse believed he had been sent into the world to do—rather than to help his cousin to pay off the mortgages, which mattered very little, so long as poor Ken had money enough to live upon.

[23]

Kenrick had chosen the army for his profession. A military career offered a poor prospect of paying off the mortgages, but it was at least a gentleman-like line of life, and the four or five hundred a year which could be squeezed out of the burdened estate enabled Kenrick to live like a gentleman among his brother officers. Honour and wealth might come to him together, perhaps, in the distant future; and when he was growing old, and had lost the zest of life, he might be able to do something for Culverhouse Castle. Cyril would be a bishop, most likely, by that time, and they would sit over their port and filberts in the wainscoted parlour at Culverhouse, wagging their grey heads deprecatingly at the shortcomings of the rising generation, condemning new guns and novel doctrines, new lights of all kinds in camp or temple.

Kenrick had served in India, and was home on leave. He was very fond of his cousin, for they had been brought up together, and nothing could be pleasanter to him than to spend his holiday fishing and shooting, reading or idling round about Little Yafford. He had liked the neighbourhood as a lad.[24] He loved it now for the sake of those boyish days which were so delightful to look back upon—all the lights in the picture remembered, all the shadows forgotten. He had an almost filial affection for Mr. and Mrs. Dulcimer—and the hills and moors and wandering streams of Yorkshire had a charm for him which was second only to his delight in his native Hampshire.

The two young men were sitting by Cyril’s hearth on this autumn evening, talking confidentially over pipe and cigar. They had spent the day apart, Kenrick tramping over the moors with his gun, Cyril engaged in his parish work.

They were talking of Christian Harefield, the owner of the Water House, one of the most important places in Little Yafford, after the Park, and the father of that Beatrix whom Mrs. Dulcimer was so anxious to dispose of matrimonially.

‘One of the most disagreeable men I ever met in my life,’ said Kenrick. ‘Miss Harefield was driving him in her basket pony carriage—he looked about as suitable an occupant of a pony carriage as Mephistopheles for a go-cart—and I met them at the[25] bottom of the hill, going up that wild road to the moor. I wonder whether he was going to gather the samolus, left-handed and fasting, or to cut mistletoe with a golden sickle? Upon my word, he looked as grim and ancient as a Druid. Beatrix stopped the pony when she saw me, and introduced me to her father. “This is Sir Kenrick Culverhouse, papa,” she said, whereat the Druid grunted. “Are you going far up the hill?” I asked, with the originality which distinguishes these casual conversations; “I’m afraid it will be dark before you come back.” “Oh, we don’t mind that,” she said, “Puck and I know our way so well.” So they went up into the thickening mist, and I saw no more of them. I dare say they are up there still. Do you know if the old gentleman is quite right in his mind?’

‘Yes, his mind is clear enough, so far as I have been able to discover; he is eccentric.’

‘And grumpy.’

‘Of a gloomy turn, no doubt. He goes nowhere, and receives no one, except Mr. Scratchell, his lawyer and agent. He seems like a man whose[26] whole nature has been soured by a great sorrow. People say that his wife’s death broke his heart.’

‘One would hardly suppose such a being could ever have had a wife—much less that he could have been fond of her. When did the lady die?’

‘Don’t you remember? She died while we were at the Vicarage—about eleven years ago. There was a good deal of talk about it at the time. Mr. Harefield and his wife were travelling in Italy. Beatrix and her governess were with them—she was a child then, you know,—and Mrs. Harefield died very suddenly—after a few hours’ illness. It was a case of Asiatic cholera, I believe. People who know Mr. Harefield, or rather who knew him before that time—for he holds himself aloof from every one now—say that he has been a changed man since the shock of his wife’s death.’

‘A melancholy story,’ said Kenrick. ‘I forgive him the discourteous grunt which was his sole recognition of my existence. Poor Beatrix! A sad beginning for her life.’

‘Yes,’ answered Cyril, with warm interest. ‘Motherless so early—with so strange and gloomy[27] a father. You cannot wonder that she is somewhat different from other girls.’

‘Somewhat different from other girls,’ echoed Kenrick. ‘She is a queen compared with other girls. That is the difference. She is worth twenty other girls—a hundred—for she has a character of her own.’

Cyril looked at him curiously.

“‘Praise from Sir Hubert Stanley!’” he exclaimed, ‘You are not often so enthusiastic, Ken.’

‘Because I seldom see anything to praise—in a woman. Don’t be frightened, Cyril. I do admire Beatrix, but only as I admire anything else in nature that is noble and rare; and I know that you admire her with quite another kind of admiration, though you have not honoured me by communicating your ideas upon the subject.’

Cyril knocked the ashes out of his pipe on the old-fashioned hob, and said not a word until he had filled it again, slowly and thoughtfully.

Clement Dulcimer was right when he called Cyril the handsomer of the two cousins. His pale clear-cut face was essentially noble. Yet it was by no means essentially attractive. That steadfast look[28] and unchangeable gravity were unpleasing to many; but, on the other hand, Cyril’s rare smile was beautiful in all eyes. It was the sudden light of mind brightening the whole countenance; not a mechanical contraction of the lips revealing a fine set of teeth, and wrinkling the eyelids agreeably. It was a smile that meant sympathy, regard, beneficence—a smile that comforted and cheered. The miserable among his flock knew it well; society saw it seldom.

Cyril’s eyes were gray, and had that steady look which passes for severity; his nose was slightly aquiline, his mouth beautiful, his brow broad and high, with hair of neutral brown cut close to the well-shaped head, and curling crisply—hair like a gladiator’s, said Kenrick, who rather prided himself upon the lighter auburn of his own locks, as he also did upon the finer line of his nose, which inclined to the Grecian, and accorded with his low straight brow and expressionless eyes, whose pupils seemed to have no more life and colour than the sculptor’s dint in the marble orb.

Kenrick had what is called an aristocratic look, and rather flattered himself upon those evidences of blue blood supposed to exist in an attenuated but[29] open nostril, a tapering hand, and an arched instep. These peculiarities, he imagined, declared as plainly as Domesday Book or title-deeds that the Culverhouses were great people on the other side of the Channel before they honoured England by coming across the sea with Norman William to appropriate some portion of it.

‘She is a noble creature,’ said Cyril, with conviction, when he had pressed the last shred of latakia into the well-filled bowl, ‘but she is Christian Harefield’s only child; and he is rich enough and suspicious enough to impute mercenary motives to any poor man who ventured to fall in love with his daughter.’

‘Fathers have flinty hearts,’ retorted Kenrick, lightly. ‘That’s an old saying, but sons and daughters generally contrive to follow their own inclinations in spite of paternal flintiness. I feel very sure that Beatrix will choose for herself, and marry the man she loves. She is just the kind of girl to dash herself blindly against the torrent of paternal wrath. It would be a grand thing for you, Cyril. You could have the Culverhouse living—a[30] poor benefice, but on your native soil—and live at the Castle. I doubt if I shall ever be able to occupy it properly,’ he added, with a regretful sigh.

‘I would take her without a sixpence, and work for her and cherish her all the days of my life,’ said Cyril, in a deep-toned voice that trembled with strong feeling, ‘but I cannot teach her to rebel against her father. “Honour thy father and thy mother.” She hears me read that sublime command every other Sunday, and am I to be the first to teach her to set it at nought?’

‘How do you know that the old Druid would object to you?’

‘I do not know as much directly, but Beatrix tells me that he will oppose any choice of hers.’

‘Obnoxious ancient Briton! Well, Cyril, all I can say is, if I were in love with a girl, I should think no more of her father than Romeo did of old Capulet, and I should sink the fifth commandment till after I’d married her—and then she could honour her father with a cock robin and holly bush card at Christmas, or a pair of muffettees on New Year’s Day, or a sugar egg at Easter.’

[31]

CHAPTER III.
in the parish church.

The Sunday evening service at Little Yafford parish church was as fashionable in its own particular way as an Italian opera in June. Everybody met everybody else there. The psalms were chanted very fairly, the anthem was always a feature, the prettiest hymns were sung, and the sermon, whether preached by the vicar or curate, seemed to have a peculiar life and fervour in it that harmonized with the more exalted feelings of the flock. The cold realism of Sunday morning gave place on Sunday evening to a vague enthusiasm, a spiritualized ardour. Of course there were people for whom that lofty liturgy soared too high—uncultured souls which demanded to be fed on coarser diet,—but these were outside the pale, and generally wore a style of bonnet which would have been a blot on the subdued beauty of the parish church, with its noble nave, long narrow[32] aisles, carved rood screen, and waggon roof. These barbarians worshipped in a queer little chapel in High Street, to which they descended a step or two from the level of the pavement, and in which tabernacle they might be heard singing their own particular hymns with the utmost strength of their untrained voices, as the Church of England people went by, the Dissenters assembling half an hour earlier than their conforming brethren, and generally prolonging their service half an hour later.

It was a pretty scene, that parish church of Little Yafford, in the late October evening. The clusters of wax candles in the brazen branches threw just enough light on column and arch to leave the greater part of the building in shadow. The rich colouring about the altar made a glow of splendour at the end of the gray stone chancel. The old oak pews, with their quaintly carved doors, reflected the light redly on bosses that took every shape, from the graceful fleur-de-lys to the dog-faced demon or blunt-nosed cherub. The font in its distant corner gleamed whitely below a cover of crimson cloth. Crimson cushions in many of the pews, and the dark green[33] and gold adornment of pulpit and reading desk, the old brass lectern, the new brass candelabra, brightened the sombre stone and dark brown oak, and made up in some wise for the loss of the stained glories of the chancel window, dull and dead at this hour.

The people came in quietly by twos and threes, and took their places with the usual hushed and solemn air; then the throng thickened, and the pews began to fill; and then the bells rang more slowly, and there came a plaintive strain of melody from the organ, soft and subdued as a whisper. This swelled presently into a voluntary, and became a triumphant peal as the vestry door opened and the surpliced choir entered the chancel, two and two, the small boys first, and the rather clumsy-looking men bringing up the rear. After these followed Cyril Culverhouse, looking tall in his white raiment and crimson hood, and lastly the Vicar, a broad and dignified figure that seemed to have been intended for lawn sleeves and a bishop’s gown.

A girl in one of the pews directly facing the chancel looked up from her open book as Cyril took[34] his place in the reading desk, and then looked quickly down again, as if the sight were too terrible. That swift shy look, and sudden fall of the eyelids told a secret old as Time himself. Mr. Culverhouse was something more than the curate of Little Yafford to that one member of his congregation. She was a girl of striking appearance, richly but carelessly dressed in velvet and silk, with feathers in her bonnet, according to the fashion for that year made and provided. She had one of those brilliant Southern complexions—that rich mingling of carnation and palest olive—which are alone sufficient for good looks; but in her case this charm was heightened by the splendour of dark Italian eyes, and the warm brown of rippling hair. Her brow was broad but low, her nose nondescript, her lips firmly moulded, her teeth faultless, her eyebrows strongly marked, and of a darker brown than her hair.

‘I am always afraid of Trix’s eyebrows,’ Isabella Scratchell, the young lady’s bosom friend, used to say. ‘They remind me of thundery weather.’

Miss Scratchell was sitting next her friend in the Harefield pew to-night. She was a small slim person,[35] distinguished by a pink and white complexion, and insignificant blunt features of the Dresden china type. There was a Scratchell pew in one of the aisles, but Beatrix liked to have her friend with her, and the Water House pew was in the more aristocratic and fashionable situation, advantages peculiarly agreeable to Isabella Scratchell.

Mr. Harefield assisted at the Sunday morning service half a dozen times or so in a quarter, just often enough to escape the stigma of absolute indifference or infidelity. His handsome Italian wife had been a Roman Catholic, and there was a feeling among the more bigoted section of society in Little Yafford that Mr. Harefield was generally lax in his ideas, like the Romans when they began to import foreign gods, and that he would not have minded worshipping Isis and Osiris if those deities had come in his way.

‘He has travelled so much, you know, my dear,’ said Mrs. Piper, of the Park, to Mrs. Dulcimer, ‘and having married a foreigner, you see, one can hardly expect him to be quite correct in his ideas. A sad education for that poor girl. I am told he has[36] taught her Greek, and hasn’t allowed her to learn music. But I think that can hardly be true.’

‘It is actually true about the music,’ cried Mrs. Dulcimer, reflecting her friend’s look of horror. ‘He hates the piano, and he had Mrs. Harefield’s old-fashioned Broadwood sent up to the lumber-room in the tower. But there is no use in thwarting a natural gift. That poor child has taught herself by ear, and plays and sings very sweetly. She spends hours up in that old turret room—in the coldest weather—wrapped in a shawl, picking out our church music. Mrs. Harefield had an extraordinary gift, you know.’

‘I never saw Mrs. Harefield. She died before Ebenezer took the Park.’

‘Yes, of course. I ought to have remembered. She was a lovely woman; and I believe that Christian Harefield was passionately fond of her, in his way; but it was not a happy marriage; there were quarrels. I did my best, but not successfully. There is an unconquerable severity and coldness in that man’s nature; and his wife had one of those ardent, impetuous dispositions,—you know what I mean.’

[37]

‘Exactly,’ chimed in the visitor, whose mind had wandered a little, and who was wondering when the Dulcimers would have a new drawing-room carpet. The present one was threadbare, and had been ingeniously turned and pieced, like a puzzle, odd bits of brighter colour fitting in here and there rather too obviously. That foolish Mr. Dulcimer spent all his money on books, and never improved his furniture, whereas in Mrs. Piper’s ideal house there was no litter of books and pamphlets, but the last fashion in carpets and tapestry table-covers, cabriole chairs and sofas, and the newest kinds of antimacassars.

Although Mr. Harefield was not often to be seen in the parish church himself, he had no objection to his daughter’s frequent attendance there; and the church and the vicarage afforded the only variety in the dullest life that a well-born heiress ever led. The music was a delight to her sensitive ear; for the organist was a fine musician, and the organ was a noble instrument, which had been presented to Little Yafford in the reign of William the Third, by a city merchant who had been born in the village, and who came back there to die after having made his fortune[38] in hides and tallow. His monument, in coloured and gilded marbles, after the florid style of the period, adorned the chancel, and recorded his public and private virtues, and his munificent gift of the organ, in a long Latin epitaph, with a great many adjectives ending in issimus.

The Scratchells had a comfortable old house in the village, but Miss Harefield was not allowed to visit there, although Isabella was her only friend and companion. Isabella might come to the Water House as often as she liked, but it was an understood thing that Beatrix was not to go to Mr. Scratchell’s, a distinction which Mrs. Scratchell and Isabella’s brothers and sisters resented as invidious.

‘We are not good enough for the heiress,’ said Clementina Scratchell, sarcastically.

‘She’s the most stuck-up young woman I ever saw,’ said Bertie, the eldest son, a sandy-complexioned, pug-nosed youth, who had been christened Herbert, but who had more the air of a Samuel or a Thomas.